Hi guys we're now going to cover the difference between public IP addresses and elastic IP addresses.
I've got a bit of theory to cover and then we're gonna go into the console and see how this works.
So the terminology can be a little bit confusing because both of public IP address and elastic IP address
are public ip addresses so they're always an IP addresses that are publicly routable on the Internet.
The key difference is that the elastic IP address is static whereas the public IP address is dynamic.
So if you put your EC2 instance into a public subnet that's configured to provide that instance
with a public IP address at boot time it's gonna be a dynamic public IP address and that means that
when you stop the instance you will lose the address if you restart the instance you don't lose it you
retain the public IP address but every time you stop the instance you're gonna lose it and you're going
to pick up a new one.
So you don't always want that.
That might not be ideal in many situations where an elastic IP address it's static.
So you can stop your instance and started again you can reboot it.
You can do whatever you want and you'll always have the same public IP address.
The other key difference is you can move an elastic IP address between instances and an elastic network
adapters elastic network adapters or just additional interfaces that you can attach to your instance.
And we'll see those in the console shortly with a public IP address.
There is no charge and these are used in public subnets.
We have an elastic IP address.
You are charged if the IP address is not used.
So for instance you might have allocated an elastic IP address to your account but you haven't associated
it with an instance or an elastic network adapter.
Alternatively it might be attached to an instance but the instance isn't running.
So in those cases you actually have to pay a small charge which is really IWM trying to incentivize
you to use these addresses because IPv4 addresses are in shortage on the Internet.
So the other thing about public IP is an elastic IPs is that always associated with a private IP
address on the instance.
So let's go back to this diagram I showed you earlier.
You remember that from the Linux operating system or Windows whichever way you will only ever see the
private IP address because the public IP address is associated to it but it's external to the operating
system.
So every time you allocate a public IP address it must be associated to a private IP address.
Now when you boot an EC2 instance into a public subnet it will have a private IP on eth0 it and
it will automatically Associate a public IP which is associated then with eth0.
Alternatively you can add an additional elastic network adapter and that could be if one and you can
then choose to associate an elastic IP address to each one.
And we'll see how all this works shortly.
Now you remember that your Internet gateway is your path out to the Internet and it performs one to
one net.
So it actually takes your source address and changes it to the public IP address.
So your source address from your operating system when it sends a packet out onto the network is always
going to be the private IP because that's the only IP it knows about the Internet gateways job is to
then change that to a public address and send it out to the Internet.
And that way it can be addressed and readable on the Internet.
And then in the reverse when it receives packets that need to be sent to your operating system it needs
to change the destination address to this address because it can't be received on the public address
because your operating system is not aware of it.
So that's how that works.
And if you say on this slide here again you can have if one can have a public IP address or an elastic
IP address associated with it.
And in that case there is still a private IP to public IP association.
So it's the same thing.
So let's head over to the console now and see all this stuff in action.
So I'm in the EC2 dashboard and what I'm going to do is just run up an instance.
So I'm going to launch a Amazon the next two am I I'm going to use the T2 micro and I'm just gonna leave
all the default so I don't need to change anything.
It's going to go into my default VPC.
All I want to do is just change my security group I just use my web access security group.
I'm not even going to SSH into this but I just need to choose a security group anyway.
And then we just hit launch so straight away we can see that a public IP address has been associated
with this instance and that happens straight away.
And then here's the private IP address.
So the private IP address and the public IP address will be associated.
And as you know from the previous lab if I did SSH into this instance you wouldn't see this public IP
address.
Now let's go down to network interfaces.
You can see we only have one.
And if we click on that interface it gives us some information so we can see stuff like the interface
or the the VPC that it's in and you can see the private IP address and the private DNS name and then
the public IP address is all here.
So I'm just going to let this initialize and pause them recording for a second and then let's see what
happens when we restart or stop our instance.
So this instance is almost ready.
Now one of the things you can do to see the status in the instance is go to instance settings under the
actions menu and get instance screenshot.
And here I can see that the operating system is booted and it's ready to be logged into but I'm not
actually going to log into it.
I just wanted to have a look.
Now the status checks haven't completed yet but the operating system is running.
So we've got our public IP and it begins in 13 and ends in 91.
So let's keep an eye on that.
And then what I'm gonna do is just restart the instance I'm going to choose reboot and now that it's
booting I can go back to instance settings get instance screenshot and as you can see we get an error
getting this console screenshot message.
So that means that it's actually in the process of rebooting and we'll just wait a couple of minutes
until it's back up again.
Let's have a look again and see what the status of this operating system is.
So it's burning up.
It's on the way.
And let's just quote close there by the film that we can see is that even if we hit refresh we can see
that we still have the same IP address that ends in 91 so that's what happens when you reboot.
But what happens if you want to shut down.
So in that case I can go instance state stop and choose.
Yes.
And so the instance is stopping now and then a minute.
Once it's in the Stop state we should see that the public IP address disappears.
So there we go the instance state is stopped and we can see that the public IP is gone the private IP
address is still there.
So that's something to remember your private IP address is retained when you stop your instance.
Let's start it up again and see if it gets a new address.
So the instance is starting up and it's actually in the running state now and you can see it's got a
new public IP address.
Now the private IP address is the same.
And we now have an association with this new public IP address.
So that's what happens when you stop and start an instance.
So that's set for this lab guys.
What I'm going to do is stop it here and then I'm going to start a new lab and in that lab we're going
to go through Elastic IP addresses.